IS 4250 : 2025
Indian Standard
ELECTRIC FOOD-MIXERS (LIQUIDIZERS AND GRINDERS) AND CENTRIFUGAL JUICERS — SPECIFICATION
( Second Revision )
ICS 97.040.50
© BIS 2025 — March 2025 — Price Group 7
Electrical Appliances Sectional Committee, ETD 32

FOREWORD
This Indian Standard (Second Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized
by the Electrical Appliances Sectional Committee had been approved by the Electrotechnical Division Council.
This standard covers the performance requirements of electric food-mixers and centrifugal juicers used for
mixing liquids, making slurries or pulps of food, for pulverizing dry food stuffs and extracting juice from
fruits and vegetables on the principle of centrifugal system.
This standard was first published in 1967 and subsequently revised in 1980. This revision has been undertaken
due to the following:
a) To align the safety requirements with the latest version of IS 302 (Part 2/Sec 14) 'Safety of household and
   similar electrical appliances: Part 2 Particular requirements, Section 14 Electric kitchen machines';
b) New methodology for endurance test of motors is added; and
c) No limitations on the power input value.
The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex D.
For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this Standard is complied with, the final value,
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis shall be rounded off in accordance with
IS 2 : 2022 'Rules for rounding off numerical values (second revision)'. The number of significant places retained
in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this Standard.

1 SCOPE
This standard covers electric motor-driven food-mixers (grinders and liquidizers) and centrifugal juicers
intended for household and similar use and designed for operation at voltages not exceeding 250 V a.c.
Any other attachments agreed between the buyers and manufacturers are also covered within the scope
of this standard provided it meets all the relevant requirements mentioned in the standard for example,
blenders, food processer attachment etc.

2 REFERENCES
The standards given below contain provisions which, through reference in this text, constitute provisions
of this standard. At the time of publication, the editions indicated were valid. All standards are
subject to revision, and parties to agreements based on this standard are encouraged to investigate the
possibility of applying the most recent edition of these standards:
IS No. — Title
IS 302 — Safety of household and similar electrical appliances:
(Part 1) : 2024 — General requirements (seventh revision)
(Part 2/Sec 14) : 2009 — Particular requirements, Section 14 Electric kitchen machines (first revision)
IS 460 (Part 1) : 2020 — Test sieves — Specification: Part 1 Wire cloth test sieves (fourth revision)
IS 3077 : 2022 — Roasted and ground coffee — Specification (third revision)

3 TERMINOLOGY
For the purpose of this standard, the following definitions in addition to those given in 3 of
IS 302 (Part 2/Sec 14) shall apply.
3.1 Food-Mixer — Appliance intended for mixing food ingredients.
NOTE — A appliance that can do the functions indicated in 3.2 and 3.3.
3.2 Grinder — A portable appliance which by operation of high-speed blades or cutters is intended
primarily for pulverizing or powdering dry foodstuffs either raw or roasted, such as coffee seeds, cereals, grains, etc.
3.3 Liquidizer — A portable appliance that by operation of high-speed blades or cutters is designed
either for mixing liquids or for converting foods with or without the presence of water (or vegetable
oils) depending on the type of food, into forms of slurry or pulps.
3.3.1 Blender — Appliance intended to pulverize solids, such as ice, vegetables, or fruit, and to
combine them into a blend, or to merge liquids and solids into a blend (food blenders) or to combine
liquids only (liquid blenders).
3.4 Food Processor Attachments — Attachments intended to finely chop batches of meat, cheese, and
vegetables by means of cutting blades rotating in a container or meant for wheat flour kneading.
NOTE — One or more of attachments doing functions such as chopping, kneading, grating, slicing, etc are examples of
the food processer attachments.
3.5 Centrifugal Juicer — An appliance or attachment designed to extract juice from fruits or
vegetables by cutting into pieces and by centrifugal action.
3.6 Cycle of Operation — The operations of juice extraction, dismantling for removal of fluff (waste),
cleaning and reassembly.
3.7 Batch Operation — The operation of a juicer where the quantity of input of the fruits or vegetables
is limited by the capacity of the vessel provided for the collection of either the juice extracted or the fluff
(waste) without overflowing.
3.8 Continuous Operation — The operation of a juicer where the quantity of input of the fruits or
vegetables is not limited by the capacity of the vessel provided for the collection of either the juice
extracted or the fluff (waste).
3.9 Rated Capacity — The rated capacity declared by the manufacturer shall be the maximum specified
quantity handled by the unit for each complete cycle of operation.
3.10 Rated Input — Power input assigned to the appliance by the manufacturer.
3.11 Normal Load
3.11.1 For the Food Mixers — Denotes the load obtained when the appliance is operated under the
load indicated in the instruction's booklet in terms of recipes (can be different for grinder and
liquidizer) or the load necessary to attain the rated input (including the tolerance) at the rated voltage in
case the actual load in terms of recipes is not indicated by the manufacturer in the instruction's booklet.
NOTE — In case the input differs with various kinds of recipes indicated in the instruction's booklet, the normal load
shall correspond to the highest input.
3.11.2 For the Juicers — The load necessary to attain rated input at rated voltage.
3.12 Nominal Capacity — The nominal capacity or capacity shall be the maximum specified quantity of
the vessels. This value shall be declared by the manufacturer.

4 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
4.1 The relevant provisions of 4 of IS 302 (Part 2/Sec 14) shall apply in addition to 4.2.
4.2 The external finish used on metal components shall be of heat and moisture-resisting nature and
shall not be adversely affected by variations in temperature occurring under normal operating
conditions or during the endurance test. The external finish of the body of the food mixer shall
not become stained due to spillage of foodstuff from the bowl of the food mixer.

5 GENERAL CONDITIONS FOR THE TESTS
5.1 The relevant provisions of 5 of IS 302 (Part 2/Sec 14) shall apply except as stated
otherwise in individual tests.
5.2 Endurance test (9) shall be carried out after the operation test (10).

6 CLASSIFICATION
The relevant provisions of 6 of IS 302 (Part 2/Sec 14) shall apply.

7 MARKING
7.1 The relevant provisions of 7 of IS 302 (Part 2/Sec 14) shall apply in addition to those
indicated in 7.2 to 7.5.
7.2 Each appliance shall be accompanied by a digital and/or physical instruction booklet containing the
following information:
a) Precautions
   1) While positioning of the appliance, and
   2) Before switching on the appliance.
b) Warning
   1) About the parts of the appliance which shall not be brought into contact with liquids;
   2) About keeping away from moving parts; and
   3) About running the appliance empty, if necessary.
c) Instructions
   1) For assembling and dismantling the bowl for cleaning and servicing;
   2) Type of supply to which the appliance may be connected and instructions for electrical connections;
   3) Don't insert finger or any other object when the machine is in operation or connected with supply mains;
   4) Instructions to the affect that after every use of food-mixer/juicers, pour warm water into the bowl to
      remove left over material, especially sticky substances, so that the cutter will rotate freely during the
      subsequent use; and
   5) The manufacturer may include instructions stating that the machine may be overhauled at least once in a year
      so that its useful life is increased.
d) Directions to switch off when the motor stalls or smoke emanates from the appliance, and.
e) Guide for operation, giving maximum quantity per loading and in the case of multi-speed appliances
   speed/control positions suitable for various operations.
7.3 If the appliance is delivered with alternative accessories, the rated input shall correspond to the
most unfavorable accessories, and speed setting.
7.4 Marking of Control Switch
The 'on' or 'off' or both positions of the control switch shall be clearly marked. If any speed control
device is provided, the various positions shall be clearly and indelibly marked.
7.5 Accessories sold separately by the appliance manufacturer shall be accompanied by an
instructions sheet giving all relevant information unless it is included in the manufacturer's
instructions for the appliance.
7.6 BIS Certification Marking
The product(s) conforming to the requirements of this standard may be certified as per the conformity
assessment schemes under the provisions of the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 and the Rules
and Regulations framed thereunder, and the products may be marked with the Standard Mark.

8 SAFETY REQUIREMENTS
The relevant provisions of 8 to 32 of IS 302 (Part 2/Sec 14) shall apply. However, tests of 11, 20, 22
and 24 of IS 302 (Part 2/Sec 14) shall be carried out in accordance with the procedure given in Annex A.

9 ENDURANCE FOR MOTOR AND BASE ASSEMBLY
The food mixer/juicer unit (excluding jars) is operated at rated input. To obtain rated input, food
mixers/juicer unit shall be operated with the generator load which can provide constant loading
consistently. Detail test set up is given in Annex B of this standard.
The food mixer/juicer unit is operated for 24 ON hours at rated input at 1.06 times the rated voltage in
cycles of ON and OFF periods and then for 24 ON hours at rated input at 0.94 times the rated voltage in
cycles of ON and OFF periods.
a) Food mixers for short-time operation having rated 'ON' time less than 5 minutes. The
   operation being carried out 6 times, the period of operation is 3 min ON and 2 min
   OFF then adequate rest time to cool down the appliances to room temperature which is not
   more than 60 min.
b) Food mixers for short operation having rated 'ON' time more than or equal to 5 min. The
   operation being carried out 6 times, the period of operation is 5 min ON and 2 min
   OFF then adequate rest time to cool down the appliances to room temperature which is not
   more than 60 min.
c) For food mixers for short time operation having rated 'ON' time of more than 30 min.
   The operation being carried out with number of times calculated by dividing declared rated
   ON time by 5 (rounded off to nearest integer). The period of operation is 5 min ON
   and 2 min OFF then adequate rest time to cool down the appliances to room
   temperature which is not more than 60 min.
d) For food mixers for continuous operation, the operation being carried out is at least
   10 times or until steady conditions are established, whichever is more. The period of
   operation is 5 min ON and 2 min OFF then adequate rest time to cool down the
   appliances to room temperature which is not more than 60 min.
The addition of ON time of all cycles shall be equal to the required 48 ON hours.
NOTES
1 The adequate rest period shall be the period enough to bring the appliance to the room temperature. Forced cooling
can be applied during this off period without opening the food mixer unit.
2 The food mixers tested under the rated input condition, any control like OLP (overload protector) that limits the
rated input loading during the test shall be short-circuited.
3 Food-mixer/juicer which can be operated at different speeds shall be operated at the highest speed setting.
4 Consumable item like coupler are subjected to replace incase of breakage due to fitment in fixture hence excluded
from the failure mode. Additional coupler has to be provided by the manufacturer to address its breakage due to
fitment in fixture during testing.
After this test, the food mixer shall withstand the electric strength test of 16.3 of IS 302-1.

10 OPERATIONAL TESTS
10.1 The food-mixers shall be subjected to such of the following operational tests for which it is
declared suitable by the manufacturer with the mixer connected in a circuit with a watt-meter and supplied
with maximum rated voltage. The tests with the recipes shall generally be conducted as per the
method specified in the instruction's booklet supplied by the manufacturer for the corresponding
recipes. However, with respect to tests of grinding coffee, whisking egg whites and Idli batter, they
shall be as per 10.2, 10.3 and 10.4. The total time of actual operation of the machine in each test shall be
noted and recorded with a stopwatch or a similar device.
10.2 Grinding Coffee (for Machines that Have a Dry Grinding Arrangement)
Freshly roasted coffee seeds corresponding to the grading 'light roast' of IS 3077 shall be used for this
test. The weight of seeds in grams shall be 40 percent of the rated capacity of the grinder bowl
of the machine under test. The seeds shall be ground for an operational time of 3 min or less and the total
time including periods of rest shall not exceed 5 min. If required, the material adhering to the sides and
cover may be scrapped and loosened with a spoon, once during the test, when the machine is at rest. At
the end of the test, the material shall be removed and weighed. The result of grinding shall be assessed by
sieve as per IS 460 (Part 1) successively through the following Indian Standard sieves: 710 microns,
500 microns and 355 microns.
The method of sieving indicated in IS 3077 shall be used. The material retained on each of the first two
sieves shall not be more than 20 percent of the weight obtained at the end of the test. The material
passing through the third sieve shall not be less than 30 percent of the same weight.
NOTES
1 It is recommended that coffee seeds of the 'pea bury' variety supplied by the coffee board, are used for this test.
2 The sieving may also be done manually, provided it meets the requirements of this standard.
10.3 Whisking Egg Whites (for Machines that have Whisking Egg Arrangement)
Fresh eggs shall be used for this test. The whites shall be carefully separated and used at once. The
weight in grams of the egg whites used in a test shall be 20 percent of the rated capacity of the liquidizer
bowl in milliliters. The egg whites shall be initially at room temperature. They shall be whisked in the
machine to produce a stiff froth. The actual operational time required shall not exceed 3 min and
the total time including periods of rest shall not exceed 5 min. The result shall be considered
satisfactory if the bowl is inverted for 5 s and the material remains in the bowl.
10.4 Idli Batter
The general procedure for preparing the Idli batter is to take decuticled black gram (Urad dal) and
parboiled rice in the proportions 1 : 2 by mass, soak them separately in the required quantity of water for
12 h and then grind them separately before mixing them together. The black gram is ground to a smooth
and frothy consistency and the rice is ground to fine semolina in water.
For the purpose of this test, the solid ingredients shall be taken in the weights specified below for
different sizes of liquidizer bowls and soaked in the quantity of water shown against each mass of solid.
The soaked solid with the unabsorbed water shall then be transferred to the bowl and ground. Excess
water to the extent of 20 percent can be added as and when needed for achieving smooth grinding results
during grinding.
Sl No. | Rated Capacity of Bowl (Litre) | Black Gram Solids (g) | Black Gram Water (ml) | Parboiled Rice Solids (g) | Parboiled Rice Water (ml)
i) | 0.5 | 100 | 225 | 100 | 113
ii) | 1.0 | 200 | 450 | 200 | 225
iii) | 1.5 | 300 | 675 | 300 | 338
NOTE — For other capacities the quantity of solid ingredients shall be fixed by interpolation.
The maximum operational time for grinding each ingredient shall be 6 min with a period of rest as
recommended by the manufacturer.
NOTE — To prepare a batter with the black gram and rice in the proportions 1 : 2 requires two batches of rice to be ground
for every batch of black gram. For the present test one batch of each will suffice as the results of grinding are assessed
without completing the mixture and cooking it in the form of Idlis.
The results of grinding the black gram are assessed by working the mixture between the thumb and
fingers. The mixture shall be smooth and frothy and no lumps shall be detected.
The results of grinding the rice shall be assessed by diluting the ground mixture with a sufficient
quantity of clean Water and sieving it successively through the following Indian Standard sieves:
1.40 mm, 1.00 mm and 500 microns.
The ground material from the bowl is recovered as fully as possible by rinsing it with water, the same
water being then used for dilution. After sieving, the water from the material retained by each sieve shall
be allowed to drain away for 5 min and the material shall then be recovered and weighed.
The grinding shall be considered satisfactory if not more than 10 percent of the mass of rice originally
taken is retained by the 1.40 mm sieve; not more than 15 percent by the 1 mm sieve and not more than
70 percent by the 0.5 mm sieve.
10.5 Operational Tests for Juicers
10.5.1 A suitable quantity of washed and cleaned carrots or fresh seasonal fruits shall be taken and
soaked in water at room temperature for 24 h. The top and tail shall be cut off. These shall be cut into
smaller pieces approximately 20 mm thick and weighed. Fruit which is known to be suitable for
juice extraction should be selected.
The juicer shall be operated at the rated voltage as per the operating instructions given by the
manufacturer. For juicers designed for batch operation, a quantity of about 350 g of carrots/fresh
seasonal fruits shall be used for each cycle of operation. The juicer shall be operated for 5 cycles
of operation. The juicers designed for continuous operation shall be operated for 5 min or the rated
operating time of the juicer whichever is less.
In either case, the juice extracted shall be filtered through a 0.25 mm sieve and the total quantity of
juice weighed. The total time for juice extraction which is measured from the moments, the feeding of
fruits is started till the juice stops coming out and excludes the time required for dismantling, cleaning
and reassembly is noted. In the case of juicers designed for batch operation, this time is the sum of
time for juice extraction for five cycles for which the juicer is to be operated. The amount of juice
extracted shall then be calculated, expressed as a percentage of the carrots taken [(B/A) × 100].
where
B = the total amount, in g, of juice extracted; and
A = the total quantity, in g, of carrots taken.
The juice pouring out of the vent provided for the purpose should have an even flow. The amount of
juice extracted shall not be less than 50 percent.
10.5.2 The juicer shall be dismantled, cleaned and inspected. There shall be no spillage/leakage from
the centrifugal mesh to such parts of the juicer which do not form the flow path of the extracted juice.

11 TEMPERATURE WITHSTAND TEST FOR BOWL
Boiling water shall be poured into the bowl at room temperature rapidly to fill it to its capacity.
After the test the bowl shall be emptied and brought back to room temperature. The test shall be repeated
five times. The bowl shall not show any sign of cracks and deformation and shall properly fit into
the holder after the test.
NOTE — This test is not applicable in case the bowl is made of metal.

12 TEST FOR CONTROLS
12.1 Test for Switches
Controlling switches for overload protection shall be capable of breaking the stalled motor current at the
maximum rated voltage six times without failure. For the purpose of these tests the rated capacity shall
be taken as equivalent to the rated input of the machine.

13 STRENGTH OF ASSEMBLY
The bowl shall be assembled and mounted on the motor housing under the following controlled
conditions six times. There shall be no chipping, cracking, or visible denting on the mounting
surfaces:
a) Press fit joints using a force of 25 kgf; and
b) Screwed on joints using a screwing couple of 25 kgf.cm.
Any other joint is allowed, provided it means the requirements of this standard.

14 SCHEDULE OF TESTS
14.1 Type Tests
The tests specified in Table 1 shall constitute the type tests and shall be carried out on one sample of
food-mixer/juicer selected preferably at random from a regular production lot.
14.1.1 Criteria of Acceptance
The sample shall successfully pass all the type tests for proving conformity with the requirements of
this specification. If any of the samples should fail in any of the type tests, the testing authority, at its
discretion, may call for fresh samples not exceeding twice the original number and subject them to all
the tests or the test(s) in which the failure(s) occurred. No failure shall be permitted in the repeat
test(s).
14.2 Acceptance Tests
Table 2 shall constitute acceptance tests.
14.3 Routine Tests
Table 3 shall constitute routine tests.

Table 1 Type Tests
(Clause 14.1)
Sl No. | Tests | Clause Reference
i) | Safety requirements | 8
ii) | Endurance for motor and base assembly | 9
iii) | Operational tests | 10
iv) | Temperature withstand test for bowl | 11
v) | Test for controls | 12
vi) | Strength of assembly | 13

Table 2 Acceptance Tests
(Clause 14.2)
Sl No. | Tests | Clause Reference
i) | Protection against access to live parts | 8 of IS 302 (Part 2/Sec 14)
ii) | Power input and current | 10 of IS 302 (Part 2/Sec 14)
iii) | Leakage current and electric strength at operating temperature | 13 of IS 302 (Part 2/Sec 14)
iv) | Moisture resistance | 15 of IS 302 (Part 2/Sec 14)
v) | Leakage current and electric strength | 16 of IS 302 (Part 2/Sec 14)
vi) | Provision for earthing | 27 of IS 302 (Part 2/Sec 14)
vii) | Operational tests | 10
viii) | Temperature withstand test for bowl | 11

Table 3 Routine Tests
(Clause 14.3 and Annex C)
Sl No. | Tests | Clause Reference
i) | Protection against access to live parts | 8 of IS 302 (Part 2/Sec 14)
ii) | Leakage current and electric strength at operating temperature | 13 of IS 302 (Part 2/Sec 14)
iii) | Provision for earthing | 27 of IS 302 (Part 2/Sec 14)
NOTE — A simple running test to verify satisfactory functioning shall be conducted on every food-mixer/juicer.

ANNEX A
(Clause 8)
ADDITIONAL SAFETY REQUIREMENTS
A-1 HEATING
Test under 11 of IS 302 (Part 2/Sec 14) to be checked as per methodology given in Annex C.
A-2 STABILITY AND MECHANICAL HAZARDS
The relevant provisions of 20 of IS 302 (Part 2/Sec 14) shall apply except that tests specified
at 20.104, 20.112, 20.113 and 20.114 of IS 302 (Part 2/Sec 14) shall be kept in abeyance for a period
of 36 months from the date of publication of this standard.
A-3 CONSTRUCTION
The relevant provisions of 22 of IS 302 (Part 2/Sec 14) shall apply in addition to those
specified in A-3.1 to A-3.9.
A-3.1 The machine shall be compact, self-contained, and of rigid construction.
A-3.2 All parts required to be cleaned and kept in a hygienic condition shall be readily accessible
without the use of special tools.
A-3.3 All castings and other materials required to be handled shall be smooth, round-edged, and free
from blow holes, pits, foreign matter, and surface imperfections.
A-3.4 Machined and formed parts shall be made to ensure complete interchangeability and parts subject
to wear shall easily replaceable.
A-3.5 In the case of liquidizers, a lid shall be provided to retain food during preparation. When
jars are provided with a lid, the lid shall be held firmly either by hand or other adequate means while
operating. A breather incorporated in the lid shall also be provided.
NOTE — For the lid placement on the jars, suitable caution is to be provided by the manufacturer on the lid and in the
instruction booklet/manual.
A-3.6 In the case of grinder with the bowl of the open type, a lid shall be provided.
A-3.7 The design shall ensure that no accidental bodily contact is made with the cutters or blades
during the normal operation of the machine.
A-3.8 The machine shall be designed to ensure that lubricants do not contaminate the food and that food
is prevented from reaching the moving parts of the machine except blades and cutters.
A-3.9 The cutters and such other exposed parts of the machine in contact with food shall be of such
material as to prevent fouling of foodstuffs and to resist corrosion and rusting. Stainless steel is one
such material that can meet the above requirements.
A-4 COMPONENTS
The relevant provisions of 24 of IS 302 (Part 2/Sec 14) shall apply in addition to those
specified in A-4.1 to A-4.6.
A-4.1 Body or the Motor Housing
It shall be made of cast iron, cast aluminum, sheet metal, high-impact thermosetting plastics or
thermoplastics like acrylonitrile-butadiene-styrene (ABS) and polypropylene, etc, of adequate strength
and shall provide stability to the machine and shall also withstand all stresses encountered during
normal use. Openings for ventilation of the motor shall be properly screened to ensure that no water
gets into the appliance due to spillage.
A-4.2 Mechanical Power Coupling
The coupling shall be flexible and shall be fabricated out of materials that shall not deteriorate with the
extended normal use of 48 h as indicated in 9. It shall be able to withstand shock and vibrations of power
transmission and speed changes (in the case of the multispeed machine). It shall be easily replaceable.
A-4.3 Bearings
The bearings may be of the sleeve or ball type. They shall be permanently lubricated. The bearings shall
have a life of at least 48 h as indicated in 9.
A-4.4 Bowl
The container or the bowl in which food is converted into slurry, pulp, or other liquids or in which dry
food is pulverized shall be made out of materials that are neutral to food acids and salts, which do not
deteriorate with age, and which can withstand temperatures up to 100 °C without change in their
physical, mechanical and chemical structures, and properties. Preferred materials are clear or
colored milky glass, clear or colored high-impact thermosetting plastic, or stainless steel. The bowl
shall be easily removable from the machine and shall be free from pits, cracks, and crevices. It shall
be smooth and shall not have corners and niches, to facilitate cleaning. The fixing arrangement of the
bowl shall be adequately strong to stand repeated operations. It may be fitted with handling grips.
A-4.5 Assembly
The bowl shall have arrangements for its stable and easy mounting on the motor housing without the use
of any tools. Accurate guides shall be provided to ensure correct mounting. Where the bowl is
detachable from the base plate, a proper gasket shall be provided, and also mechanical seal for leakproof
assembly shall be provided. It shall be possible to remove the bowl with the base plate if provided
separately as one assembly for the purposes of emptying the contents.
A-4.6 Blades of Cutters
The material of the blades of cutters shall be stainless steel.

ANNEX B
(Clause 9 and Annex C)
GENERATOR LOAD SETUP
B-1 PROCEDURE OF FIXING OF APPLIANCES ON THE FIXTURE
a) Prepare a fixture as shown in Fig. 1;
b) The fixture unit consist of a base of metal surface, stand consist of adjuster (1), knob
   adjusters (2 to 13), springs (14 to 17) and clamp (18);
c) The generator load (G) is attached at the top centre of fixture as shown in Fig. 1;
d) The clamp (18) is used to fix the testing appliance (for example, mixer grinder);
e) The adjuster (1) is used to adjust the height (up and down movement) of the generator load (G);
f) The knob adjusters (6, 7, 8, 9) are used to adjust the left and right movement of the generator load (G);
g) The knob adjusters (10, 11, 12, 13) are used to adjust the To and Fro movement of the generator load (G);
h) The load generator (G) is attached at the top of the testing appliance and fixed with
   coupler-to-coupler engagement (60 percent to 80 percent engagement);
j) The knob adjusters (2, 3, 4, 5) are used to stable the whole setup after all the adjustments/movements are fixed;
k) To create load, the common wire and high speed wire of generator (G) is connected with load bulbs; and
m) The load bulbs are connected in parallel assembly and the load can be varied as per the requirement.
NOTE — The load can be created with resistive elements other than bulbs.
B-2 PROCEDURE OF FIXING OF APPLIANCES WITHOUT FIXTURE
a) Prepare a setup as shown in Fig. 2;
b) The generator load (G) consist of a motor with replaceable collar;
c) The collar is attached to the bottom of the generator load (G) with the help of screws and bolts;
d) The spacers are used to adjust the height of the collar with respect to the appliance;
e) The generator load (G) is mounted on the appliance for testing;
f) To create load, the common wire and high-speed wire of generator (G) is connected with load bulbs; and
g) The load bulbs are connected in parallel assembly and the load can be varied as per the requirement.
NOTE — The load can be created with resistive elements other than bulbs.
FIG. 1 MOTOR UNIT WITH GENERATOR LOAD WITH A FIXTURE
NOTE — The fixture is designed such that the variable generator load is attached on the appliance. The movement (x-axis, y-axis and
z-axis) of the fixture is adjustable in accordance with the appliance. The bulbs can be used to adjust/maintain the load.
FIG. 2 MOTOR UNIT WITH GENERATOR LOAD WITHOUT A FIXTURE
NOTE — A suitable jar collar (as per appliance model) is mounted with the mixer motor top bracket to make the generator, and lock
the generator on the top of the appliance unit. The bulbs can be used to adjust/maintain the load.

ANNEX C
(Annex A)
HEATING TEST
C-1 The test will be done by the following method:
The test procedure shall be followed by either of the method given in accordance with Fig. 1 or Fig. 2 of Annex B.
The appliance shall be operated using generator load as shown in Fig. 1 or Fig. 2 or any other means,
which can continuously provide consistent load.
Temperature rises of windings are determined by the resistance method unless the windings are
non-uniform or if it is difficult to make the necessary connections, in which case the temperature rise is
determined by means of thermocouples.
The temperature rise of a winding is calculated from the formula:
Δt = ((R₂ − R₁)/R₁)(k + t₁) − (t₂ − t₁)
where
Δt = temperature rise of the winding;
R₂ = resistance at the end of the test;
R₁ = resistance at the beginning of the test;
k = 234.5 for copper windings and 225 for aluminum windings;
t₁ = room temperature at the beginning of the test; and
t₂ = room temperature at the end of the test.
At the beginning of the test, the windings are to be at room temperature. It is recommended that the
resistance of windings at the end of the test be determined by taking resistance measurements as
soon as possible after switching off and then at short intervals so that a curve of resistance against time
can be plotted for ascertaining the resistance at the instant of switching off.
Follow the instructions for testing procedure.
a) Adjust the generator load setup in accordance with the appliance (for example, mixer grinder) model;
b) A generator with variable resistive load is placed on the appliance;
c) The appliance shall be operated under specified (generator) load and supplied with
   the most unfavorable voltage between 0.94 times and 1.06 times the rated voltage; and
d) The appliance shall be operated at rated power input with the specified (generator)
   load or any other means, which can provide constant load consistently. The Food Mixers
   tested under the rated input condition, any control like OLP that limits the rated input
   loading during the test shall be short-circuited.
The appliance will be operated as follows:
a) Food mixers for short-time operation having rated 'ON' time less than 5 min. The
   operation being carried out 6 times, the period of operation is 3 min ON and 2 min
   OFF then adequate rest time to cool down the appliances to room temperature which is not
   more than 60 min.
b) Food mixers for short operation having rated 'ON' time more than or equal to 5 min. The
   operation being carried out 6 times, the period of operation is 5 min ON and 2 min
   OFF then adequate rest time to cool down the appliances to room temperature which is not
   more than 60 min.
c) For food mixers for short time operation having rated 'ON' time of more than 30 min.
   The operation being carried out with number of times calculated by dividing declared rated
   ON time by 5 (rounded off to nearest integer). The period of operation is 5 min ON
   and 2 min OFF then adequate rest time to cool down the appliances to room
   temperature which is not more than 60 min.
d) For food mixers for continuous operation, The operation being carried out is at least
   10 times or until steady conditions are established, whichever is more. The period of
   operation is 5 min ON and 2 min OFF then adequate rest time to cool down the
   appliances to room temperature which is not more than 60 min.
Appliances that can be operated at different speeds shall be operated at the highest speed.
During the test, the temperature rises are monitored continuously and shall not exceed the values shown
in Table 3 in accordance with 11 of IS 302-1.

ANNEX D
(Foreword)
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION
Electrical Appliances Sectional Committee, ETD 32
[Committee member list — organizations and representatives as printed in the standard.]

This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: ETD 32 (23559).
